# In-Media-Chess

♟♜♞♝♛♚ - Acknowledgements - ♔♕♗♘♖♙

Thank you for trying out In Media Chess! It really means a lot to me that you've shown interest in this pet project of mine!

This is In Media Chess, a chess variant that keeps all the rules of chess the same except for a few simple changes.

This program was coded entirely in C, and took about a month of on-and-off labor to put together.
    While I don't think it's perfect, I am happy with its current state.

♟♜♞♝♛♚ - Setup - ♔♕♗♘♖♙

First, decide by any means who will be Player 1 (P1) and who will be Player 2 (P2).
    P1 will play White and P2 will play Black; White goes first.

Currently, this version of chess is not currently playable.
    I do have plans of making this variation playable, but those plans haven't been realized yet.
    Until then, you will need a separate chess board or simulator to play this variant.

Run the "EnMediaChess.out" file in a Bash terminal.
    You may use the following command to do so:
        clear && ./EnMediaChess.out
    Alternatively, if you make changes to the code, run this command instead:
        clear && gcc EnMediaChess.c ChessUtilities.c -o EnMediaChess.out && ./EnMediaChess.out

♟♜♞♝♛♚ - Procedural Generation - ♔♕♗♘♖♙

When you select to generate a board, a board-state will be procedurally generated.
    The purpose is to minimize the usefulness of memorizing chess openings, focusing on raw strategy instead.
    The board-state is meant to simulate joining a chess game after an unknown number of turns has passed.
        Hence the play on the literary device "En Media Res."
    The board-states generated by this program should be possible through normal gameplay.

White and black pieces are generated in pairs.
    White and Black will have the same amount and types of pieces.
    All of White's and Blacks pieces will be rotationally symmetric to one another.
        The axis of rotational symmetry is the center of the board, with a 180° rotation.

If a White piece is captured during generation, it's corresponding Black piece is captured too.
    Similarly, if a White Pawn promotes, so does its corresponding Black Pawn.

Altogether, this helps ensure the board-state is as fair as possible.

♟♜♞♝♛♚ - Basic Rules - ♔♕♗♘♖♙

All pieces move like they would in a normal game of chess.

The object of the game is still to checkmate your opponent's king.
    This means placing the opponent's king in an inescapable threat of capture.
    THe first player to do this to their oppnent wins.

The game ends in stalemate when one or both of the following happen:
    10 consecutive turns with no captures or pawn movements;
    The turn player is not in check, but has no valid moves

Due to the nature of this variation, castling, and en passant are not allowed.
    Even assuming a king and rook generated on their standard starting positions (very unlikely),
        it would be impossible to know if either moved away and then moved back to their standard starting position or not.
    It would also be impossible to know if a pawn moved two spaces in two turns, or two spaces in one turn.

♟♜♞♝♛♚ - Pie/Swap Rule - ♔♕♗♘♖♙

Because of procedural board generations, it is possible for the game to begin in a \'Mate in One\' scenario.
    This results in P2 losing before their first turn with no counterplay.

To remedy this, I will also include the Pie or Swap Rule.
    P2 gets the option to swap roles with P1 as their first turn, after which their turn ends:
    P1 => Black; P2 => White; it is now P1's turn again.
    In a game with a physical board, it may be helpful to rotate the board 180 degrees.

P1 does not get this option at all, and P2 cannot do this once their first turn is over.

A Role Reversal counts as a valid action, and thus can be used by P2 to avoid checkmate on their first turn.
    Specifically, if P1 manages to \'Mate in One\' P2 on P1's first turn, P2 can do a Role Reversal.
    This leads to P1 becoming Black, and P2 becoming White, allowing P2 to use P1's own \'Mate in One\' against them.

While a key use of Role Reversal is to avoid a first-turn checkmate, P2 can do a Role Reversal for any other reason too.
    Overall, this helps guarantee P2 has at least 1 turn to avoid checkmate despite the procedurally generated board state.
    It otherwise helps mitigate P1's first-turn advantage.

♟♜♞♝♛♚ - References - ♔♕♗♘♖♙

      Pawn   Rook   Knight   Bishop   Queen   King
White  ♙     ♖      ♘       ♗       ♕      ♔ 
Black  ♟     ♜      ♞       ♝       ♛      ♚

♙ move ↑, toward the 8 rank; ♟ move ↓, toward the 1 rank.

♟♜♞♝♛♚ - Changelog - ♔♕♗♘♖♙

Known Issues:
    

V1.12:
    Added a list of captured pieces to make it more clear what pieces are missing and why.
    Added the ablity for pawns to shift based on how many pieces pre-captured, suggesting they were the capturing piece.

    Fixed a bug with debug messages not printing when Knights were pre-captured.
    Fixed a bug with debug messages not printing when Queens were pre-captured.

V1.11: 
    Added rules to the "README.md" file.
    Added a changelog to the "README.md" file.
    Added white and black squares to represent empty light and dark squares on a chess board.
    
    Removed the rules option from main menu.
    
    Improved debug print statements.
    Changed chess board borders to UNICODE-8 box-drawing characters.
    
    Fixed a bug preventing the program from correctly reading the position of the knight when it checks the king.
    Fixed a bug where a pawn promoting to a knight would result in more bishops and vice versa.
    Fixed a bug where pawns would spawn in locations that would not be possible in normal play.


V1.1:
    Added separate "ChessUtilities.c" and "ChessUtilities.h" to keep "InMediaChess.c" clean.
    
    Changed chess piece representations to UNICODE-8 characters. 
    
    Fixed conditionals for added stability.
    Fixed a crash where the program would attempt to spawn a bishop outside the board.
    Fixed a crash where the program may attempt to place the King on a space outside the board.

V1.0
    Program released.
    